PENNSYLVANIA RIGHT-TO-KNOW LAW
Act No. 3 of 2008, 65 P.S. §§ 67.101-67.3104
Full Statute Text - Official Source: https://www.legis.state.pa.us/WU01/LI/LI/US/HTM/2008/0/0003..HTM

PENNSYLVANIA RIGHT-TO-KNOW LAW - 65 P.S. § 67.101 ET SEQ.

§ 67.101. Short title.
This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Right-to-Know Law."

§ 67.102. Legislative intent and construction.
(a) The General Assembly finds that the right of access to information is fundamental to a democratic society and necessary to the functioning of an informed citizenry and that secrecy in government is discouraged.

(b) It is the intent of the General Assembly that this act be construed to maximize access to records maintained by agencies and to minimize the reasons for denying access to records.

(c) This act shall be construed with a presumption that the records of an agency are accessible to the public.

§ 67.103. Definitions.
As used in this act:

"Agency" means a Commonwealth agency, local agency, judicial agency or legislative agency.

"Commonwealth agency" means the Governor and the departments, boards, commissions, authorities and other officers and agencies of the Commonwealth government, but shall not include any court or other officer or agency of the unified judicial system, the General Assembly or agencies or officers thereof.

"Local agency" means a county, municipality, school district, other political subdivision, authority, council, board, bureau, commission, department or officer thereof and any other body which is created by State or local authority or which is funded by the Commonwealth or a political subdivision.

"Public record" includes a record, including a financial record, of a Commonwealth agency or local agency that:
(1) is not exempt under section 708 of this act;
(2) is not exempt from disclosure under any other Federal or State law or regulation or judicial decree or order;
(3) is not protected by a privilege; and
(4) has not been sealed by order of a Commonwealth agency in a judicial or administrative proceeding.

"Record" means information, regardless of physical form or characteristics, that documents a transaction or activity of an agency and that is created, received or retained pursuant to law or in connection with a transaction, work or business of the agency.

§ 67.301. Right of access to records.
(a) All records in the possession of a Commonwealth agency or local agency shall be presumed to be a public record. The presumption shall not apply if:
(1) the record is exempt under section 708 of this act;
(2) the record is protected by a privilege;
(3) the record is exempt from disclosure under any other Federal or State law; or
(4) the record is exempt from disclosure under any regulation or judicial order or decree.

(b) A public record shall be accessible for inspection and duplication by a requester in accordance with this act.

§ 67.502. Designation of open-records officer.
Each agency shall designate an open-records officer who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this act.

§ 67.701. Written request required.
(1) A written request shall be submitted to the agency's open-records officer and shall include the following:
(a) identification or description of the requested records;
(b) the medium in which the record is requested; and
(c) the name and address of the person requesting access.

§ 67.901. Agency response.
(a) Upon receipt of a written request for access to a record, an agency shall make a good faith effort to determine if the record requested is a public record and to respond as promptly as possible under the circumstances existing at the time of the request.

(b) Except as otherwise provided in this act, an agency shall respond within five business days of receipt of the request. The response shall inform the requester whether the request is granted or denied.

(c) If an agency fails to respond within five business days of receipt of the request, the request shall be deemed denied.

(d) Upon granting a request for access, the agency shall fulfill the request as soon as possible, but no later than 30 days from the date of the response, unless access cannot be provided within 30 days due to the total scope of the request.

§ 67.1101. Office of Open Records.
(a) There is established in the Department of Community and Economic Development an Office of Open Records.

(b) The office shall:
(1) review the denial of a request for access to a record;
(2) issue a final determination;
(3) provide information relating to this act;
(4) issue advisory opinions;
(5) provide training courses; and
(6) promulgate regulations.

§ 67.1101.1. Appeals officer.
(a) The Executive Director shall designate appeals officers to review appeals filed under this act.

§ 67.1301. Appeals.
(a) A requester who is denied access to a record may file an appeal with the office within 15 business days of the mailing date of the agency's notice of denial or within 15 business days of a deemed denial.

(b) The appeals officer assigned to review the appeal shall issue a final determination within 30 days of receipt of the appeal, unless the appeals officer determines that an extension is necessary.

§ 67.1302. Court review.
A requester or an agency aggrieved by a final determination of an appeals officer may file a petition for review with the court of common pleas within 30 days of the mailing date of the final determination.

MAJOR EXEMPTIONS (Section 708):

(1) A record that constitutes or reveals a trade secret or confidential proprietary information
(2) Financial records of an agency employee, appointee, official or consultant
(3) A record that constitutes or reveals the selection or scoring criteria for examinations
(4) Personal financial information in a record not publicly accessible
(5) A record identifying the name, home address or date of birth of a child 17 years of age or younger
(6) Employment history, salary information, disciplinary records, social security number, personal financial information, home, cellular or personal telephone numbers, personal email addresses or home addresses of agency employees
(7) A record including the name, address or telephone number of any family member, spouses or children of law enforcement officers, judicial officers or employees or correctional officers
(8) Records relating to or resulting in a criminal investigation, including complaints of potential criminal conduct other than a private criminal complaint
(9) Predecisional deliberations including recommendations, advice, counsel, deliberative policy discussions and other materials that are consultative or deliberative in nature
(10) A record protected by attorney-client privilege, attorney work product or judicial privilege
(11) Records relating to agency adoption or custody proceedings regarding minors
(12) Medical records or psychological reports of individuals
[Additional exemptions continue through (33)]

SUMMARY OF KEY PROVISIONS:

1. DEFINITION: Records of agencies presumed public unless specifically exempted

2. ACCESS RIGHTS: All persons have right to access public records with written request required

3. REQUEST PROCESS: Written request to agency open-records officer with identification of records

4. RESPONSE TIME: 5 business days to respond; 30 days to fulfill unless scope requires extension

5. FEES: Duplication fees and enhanced electronic access fees as established by Office of Open Records

6. APPEALS: 15 business days to appeal to Office of Open Records; 30 days for appeals officer determination

7. COURT REVIEW: 30 days to petition court of common pleas for review of appeals officer determination

8. ENFORCEMENT: Civil penalties for bad faith denials; attorney fees for successful requesters

9. OVERSIGHT: Office of Open Records provides training, advisory opinions, and regulation promulgation

Last Updated: January 2025
Source: Pennsylvania General Assembly - https://www.legis.state.pa.us/