RHODE ISLAND ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS ACT
Rhode Island General Laws Chapter 38-2 - Access to Public Records
Full Statute Text - Official Source: https://webserver.rilegislature.gov/Statutes/

RHODE ISLAND ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS ACT - RIGL CHAPTER 38-2

§ 38-2-1. Purpose.
The public's right to access to public records and the individual's right to dignity and privacy are both recognized to be principles of the utmost importance in a free society. The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate public access to public records. It is also the intent of this chapter to protect from disclosure information about particular individuals maintained in the files of public bodies when disclosure would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.

§ 38-2-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

(1) "Agency" or "public body" means any executive, legislative, judicial, regulatory, or administrative body of the state, or any political subdivision thereof; including, but not limited to: any department, division, agency, commission, board, office, bureau, authority; any school, fire, or water district, or other agency of Rhode Island state or local government that exercises governmental functions; any authority as defined in § 42-35-1(b); or any other public or private agency, person, partnership, corporation, or business entity acting on behalf of and/or in place of any public agency.

(2) "Chief administrative officer" means the highest authority of the public body.

(3) "Public business" means any matter over which the public body has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory power.

(4) [Exemptions] The term "public record" shall not include:
[Extensive list of exemptions including:]
- Personnel and medical files and similar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy
- Preliminary drafts, notes, or interagency or intra-agency memoranda that are not retained by the public body in the ordinary course of business
- Records specifically exempted from disclosure by statute
- Trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from a person and privileged or confidential
- Communications within or between public bodies of an advisory nature to the extent that they cover other than purely factual materials and are preliminary to any final agency determination of policy or action
- Library records which by law are required to be kept confidential
- Information which would jeopardize the safety of personnel or the public if disclosed

§ 38-2-3. Right to inspect and copy records — Duty to maintain minutes of meetings — Procedures for access.

(a) Except as provided in § 38-2-2(4), all records maintained or kept on file by any public body, whether or not those records are required by any law or by any rule or regulation, shall be public records and every person or entity shall have the right to inspect and/or copy those records at such reasonable time as may be determined by the custodian thereof.

(b) Any reasonably segregable portion of a public record excluded by § 38-2-2(4) shall be available for public inspection after the deletion of the information which is the basis of the exclusion. If an entire document or record is deemed non-public, the public body shall state in writing that no portion of the document or record contains reasonable segregable information that is releasable.

(c) Each public body shall make, keep, and maintain written or recorded minutes of all meetings.

(d) Each public body shall adopt written procedures regarding public access to its public records. These procedures must include, but need not be limited to, the identification of a designated public records officer or unit, how to make a public records request, and where a public record request should be made, and a copy of these procedures shall be posted on the public body's website if such a website is maintained and be made otherwise readily available to the public.

(e) A written request for public records need not be made on a form established by a public body if the request is otherwise readily identifiable as a request for public records.

(f) A public body receiving a request shall permit the inspection or copying within ten (10) business days after receiving a request. If the inspection or copying is not permitted within ten (10) business days, the public body shall forthwith explain in writing the need for additional time to comply with the request.

(g) In such cases the public body may have up to an additional twenty (20) business days to comply with the request if it can demonstrate that the voluminous nature of the request, the number of requests for records pending, or the difficulty in searching for and retrieving or copying the requested records, is such that additional time is necessary to avoid imposing an undue burden on the public body.

(h) If a public record is in active use or in storage and, therefore, not available at the time a person or entity requests access, the custodian shall so inform the person or entity and make an appointment for the person or entity to examine such records as expeditiously as they may be made available.

(i) At the election of the person or entity requesting the public records, the public body shall provide copies of the public records electronically, by facsimile, or by mail in accordance with the requesting person or entity's choice, unless complying with that preference would be unduly burdensome due to the volume of records requested or the costs that would be incurred. The person requesting delivery shall be responsible for the actual cost of delivery, if any.

(j) No public body shall require a statement of purpose as a condition for making requests for public records available nor shall the public body withhold public records from disclosure because of the intended purpose of making the request.

§ 38-2-4. Copying costs and search fees.
(a) The public body may charge a fee for copies that shall not exceed fifteen cents ($.15) per page.

(b) If complying with a request for inspection or copying requires more than one (1) hour of search or retrieval time, the public body may charge for the personnel costs associated with the time required, which shall be based upon the lowest paid employee capable of performing the task. The charge shall not exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00) per hour and shall not include the first hour of search time.

§ 38-2-5. Enforcement and remedies.
Any person denied access to records may apply to the superior court for a writ of mandamus to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the court determines that the public body has arbitrarily or capriciously denied access to the records, the court may impose a civil fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) per violation.

§ 38-2-8. Complaints to the Attorney General.
(a) Any person denied access to a public record by a public body may file a complaint with the attorney general on forms to be provided by the attorney general.

(b) The attorney general is charged with investigating any complaint brought by a private citizen related to access to public records. Upon determining that there has been an unlawful denial of access to public records, the attorney general may institute proceedings in the superior court to compel access to public records.

§ 38-2-9. Superior court jurisdiction.
The superior court shall have jurisdiction to issue writs of mandamus ordering the disclosure of records improperly withheld from any person, regardless of where the public body is located within the state.

SUMMARY OF KEY PROVISIONS:

1. DEFINITION: All records of public bodies presumed public unless specifically exempted

2. ACCESS RIGHTS: Every person or entity has right to inspect and copy public records

3. REQUEST PROCESS: Written request preferred but not required on specific form; must be readily identifiable as records request

4. RESPONSE TIME: 10 business days to permit inspection; additional 20 days if voluminous/complex request

5. FEES: Up to $0.15 per page for copies; up to $15/hour for search time after first hour

6. EXEMPTIONS: Personnel files, preliminary drafts, trade secrets, communications of advisory nature, library records, safety-sensitive information

7. APPEALS: Complaints to Attorney General; superior court mandamus action available

8. ENFORCEMENT: Civil fines up to $1,000 per violation for arbitrary or capricious denials

9. SEGREGATION: Must provide reasonably segregable portions of partially exempt records

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
- First enacted: 1979 (Rhode Island was 49th state to enact FOIA law)
- Major revisions: 1991, 1998, 2008

Last Updated: January 2025
Source: Rhode Island General Assembly - https://webserver.rilegislature.gov/Statutes/